---
layout: post
title: Charter schools and diversity
---

(This post started life as an email response to a program on AM 950, a liberal talk radio station, which was talking about education and charter schools in the Twin Cities. The host, disappointingly, repeated incorrect conventional wisdom about charter schools, which his guest shot down as gracefully as she could. But further listening revealed to me a much deeper (and apolitical) flaw in our thinking about charter schools.)

There is a fundamental flaw in our thinking about charter schools that keeps us from clearly understanding their best role in our educational system. I’m not talking about the usual nonsense like charter schools are selective (they aren’t, by law, at least not here in Minnesota), or that they’re stealing from public schools (they ARE public schools), or that they’re corporate thieves (they’re passionate educators). No, this is a different and more subtle misunderstanding.

The misunderstanding I’m talking about is the idea that the intended value of charter schools is as test labs to develop new education techniques for broad adoption by non-charter public schools. The problem with this idea is the underlying assumption that there is One True Way to teach children, that is equally applicable to all children and all schools. But each child is unique, with unique talents, interests, cultural experiences, and challenges. Expecting a single teaching methodology to best represent all children’s needs is disrespectful to children, and flies in the face of reality.

The actual value of charter schools is diversity. Small, focused schools with the freedom to innovate can offer programs that are especially valuable to students with particular needs. For example, where there is a large immigrant population, charter schools can provide culturally sensitive, bilingual education more effectively than trying to spread the same amount of resources across a large number of public schools ill-equipped to meet the special needs of a particular culture. Charters can focus on particular arts, or sciences, or particular physical or learning disabilities, bringing the whole school to bear on helping students succeed despite their challenges, or take maximum advantage of their interests and talents.

This isn’t something that scales, or something that can be seeded into mainstream schools to make them “better”. This is something wholly unique and wonderful, something that can only happen when truly diverse schools are matched to the natural diversity of the children they are intended to educate.

Identical opportunity is not equal opportunity, because not everyone is equally suited to the opportunity given (the best chalkboard in the world won’t help a blind student, for example). The closest thing to true equal opportunity in education is maximum opportunity. For each child to receive an education best suited to their unique needs, talents, values, challenges, and dreams – that is much more true to the notion of “equality”. Moreover, the equality of maximum opportunity will lead students to be more successful adults and better citizens. It’s good for everyone. By creating educational opportunities closer to the uniqueness of the students, charter schools can bring us closer to true educational equality.

This is a politically charged critique, and clearly targeted at liberal misconceptions about charters. But conservatives are in their own way just as bad. Conservatives have been lukewarm about charters, preferring their own idea of vouchers – basically checks handed out to privatized schools by the government. This is problematic in a couple of ways. First, it’s grounded in the pseudo-capitalist belief that competition makes everything better, and therefore the best way to good schools is competition culling out the bad ones. This is itself grounded in the same One True Wayist thought that they call socialism when liberals try to do it through highly standardized schools – that we can somehow home in on the “best” way to teach all children, uniformly. But worse, it often masks a thinly veiled agenda for public subsidy of religious schools, and voucher-supported cost-plus private schools that the poor and middle class could not afford.

Charter schools disprove the core belief of vouchers, by providing real choice and “competition”, without the explicit money-handling aspects of vouchers – and thus, without the potential for funding religious or private schools. If competition drives performance, then conservatives should be satisfied with charters. Generally, they are not.

The diversity aspect of charters provides a potentially-measurable point of success. There are lots of highly charged claims about charter performance on standardized tests, but it appears charters do about the same as regular public schools. Where I think we might see a measurable benefit, though, is in graduation rates for at-risk students. Because charters so often represent students who don’t fit well into mainstream schools, then the influence of charters should be seen in increasing graduation rates across districts that have them. Has anyone done such an analysis? I don’t know.
